.\" libpulp - User-space Livepatching Library
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021 SUSE Software Solutions GmbH
.\"
.\" This file is part of libpulp.
.\"
.\" libpulp is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" libpulp is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with libpulp.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

.TH ULP_TRIGGER 1 "" "" "Libpulp Tools"
.SH NAME
ulp_trigger \- Apply a live patch
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ulp_trigger
[OPTION]...
.BR -p pid
.I file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ulp_trigger
attaches to the target process specified by
.I pid
and applies the live patch described by the metadata
.I file
that it takes as argument.
After parsing the metadata file, several checks are performed to verify that
the target process can receive the specified live patch:
.TP
.B Target Library
A live patch replaces functions belonging to a shared library, thus,
.B ulp_trigger
searches the memory space of the target process for its presence. When the
library is not present,
.B ulp_trigger
exits in error.
.TP
.B Replacement functions
The metadata file contains a list of replacement functions, which must be
present in the live patch object (DSO). If all functions are present, the live
patching operation can proceed, otherwise
.B ulp_trigger
exits in error.
.TP
.B Attaching to the Target Process
Libpulp uses ptrace to attach to target processes, thus only the owner of a
process (or root) can apply a live patch to it. Moreover, on systems that have
Linux Security Modules (LSM) enabled, some extra convincing might be required
(see Ptrace access mode checking in
.IR ptrace (2)).
When
.B ulp_trigger
is unable to attach to the target process, it exits in error.
.TP
.B Runtime support
Applying a live patch requires functions from libpulp.so, which must have been
loaded into the address space of the target process. Typically, this is
accomplished with LD_PRELOAD (see
.IR libpulp (7)).
.TP
.B Forward progress
After attaching to the target process with ptrace, Libpulp calls functions from
libpulp.so. The execution of these functions happens from the context of a
signal handler, thus
.I AS-Unsafe
functions are not allowed (see
.IR attributes (7)).
However, Libpulp requires the use of
.IR malloc (3),
.IR dlopen (3)
and
.IR dlsym (3),
which are all
.IR AS-Unsafe .
In order to avoid deadlocks, libpulp.so checks that these functions are not in
execution anywhere in the target process, before starting the live patching
operation.
.SH FATAL ERRORS
If a problem happens after Libpulp started replacing functions from the target
process, the process might end up in an inconsistent state. When that happens
.B ulp_trigger
exits with error code
.BR -1 ,
and the user is advised to kill the process.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -r, --retries=N
To guarantee
.BR "Forward Progress" ,
Libpulp first checks whether trying to apply a live patch would cause a
deadlock in the target process, or if it would be safe to do so. By default,
.B ulp_trigger
performs this check a single time and exits in error if the check fails.
However, the state of the relevant locks usually changes very quickly, thus,
there is a high chance that trying again after a brief moment would allow the
live patching operation to succeed without risk of deadlock. This option tells
.B ulp_trigger
to try again
.I N
times.
.TP
.B -q, --quiet
Do not produce any output.
.TP
.B -v, --verbose
Produce verbose output.
.TP
.B -?, --help
Display a lengthy usage message.
.TP
.B -usage
Display a brief usage message.
.TP
.B -V --version
Print program version and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B ulp_trigger
exits 0 on success, 1 on error, and -1 on fatal errors. A fatal error is an
indication that the target process should be killed, because it was probably
left in an inconsistent state.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR libpulp (7),
.BR ulp_packer (1),
.BR ulp_reverse (1),
.BR ulp_dump (1),
.BR ulp_post (1),
.BR ulp_trigger (1),
.BR ulp_check (1).
