.\" libpulp - User-space Livepatching Library
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021 SUSE Software Solutions GmbH
.\"
.\" This file is part of libpulp.
.\"
.\" libpulp is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" libpulp is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with libpulp.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

.TH ULP_CHECK 1 "" "" "Libpulp Tools"
.SH NAME
ulp_check \- Apply a live patch
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ulp_check
[OPTION]...
.BR -p pid
.I file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ulp_check
attaches to the target process specified by
.I pid
and checks whether the live patch described by the metadata
.I file
that it takes as argument has already been applied or not.
.PP
Only relevant processes can be inspected with
.BR ulp_check .
More specifically, the following conditions must be met:
.TP
.B Attaching to the Target Process
Libpulp uses ptrace to attach to target processes, thus only the owner of a
process (or root) can apply a live patch to it. Moreover, on systems that have
Linux Security Modules (LSM) enabled, some extra convincing might be required
(see Ptrace access mode checking in
.IR ptrace (2)).
When
.B ulp_check
is unable to attach to the target process, it exits in error.
.TP
.B Runtime support
Applying a live patch requires functions from libpulp.so, which must have been
loaded into the address space of the target process. Typically, this is
accomplished with LD_PRELOAD (see
.IR libpulp (7)).
.SH FATAL ERRORS
If a problem happens during the execution of functions from libpulp.so, the
target process might end up in an inconsistent state. When that happens
.B ulp_check
exits with error code
.BR -1 ,
and the user is advised to kill the process.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -q, --quiet
Do not produce any output.
.TP
.B -v, --verbose
Produce verbose output.
.TP
.B -?, --help
Display a lengthy usage message.
.TP
.B -usage
Display a brief usage message.
.TP
.B -V --version
Print program version and exit.
.SH BUGS
.B ulp_check
also returns -1 on non-fatal errors.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B ulp_check
.\" XXX: ulp_check curretly returns -1 on non-fatal errors.
exits 0 on success, 1 on error, and -1 on fatal errors. A fatal error is an
indication that the target process should be killed, because it was probably
left in an inconsistent state.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR libpulp (7),
.BR ulp_packer (1),
.BR ulp_reverse (1),
.BR ulp_dump (1),
.BR ulp_post (1),
.BR ulp_trigger (1),
.BR ulp_check (1).
