.\" libpulp - User-space Livepatching Library
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021 SUSE Software Solutions GmbH
.\"
.\" This file is part of libpulp.
.\"
.\" libpulp is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" libpulp is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with libpulp.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

.TH ULP_REVERSE 1 "" "" "Libpulp Tools"
.SH NAME
ulp_reverse \- Create live patch metadata
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ulp_reverse
.I file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ulp_reverse
creates a live patch metadata used to revert the effects of the metadata
.I file
that it takes as argument.
Live patch reversal does not require a live patch object file, because it does
not add new replacement functions; rather, it causes the reverse-patched
process to fallback to the functions that had been previously replaced. These
functions are already present in the memory space of the target process.
.PP
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B ulp_reverse
exits 0 on success and a positive integer on error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR libpulp (7),
.BR ulp_packer (1),
.BR ulp_reverse (1),
.BR ulp_dump (1),
.BR ulp_post (1),
.BR ulp_trigger (1),
.BR ulp_check (1).
