.\" libpulp - User-space Livepatching Library
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021 SUSE Software Solutions GmbH
.\"
.\" This file is part of libpulp.
.\"
.\" libpulp is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2.1 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" libpulp is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Lesser General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with libpulp.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

.TH ULP_PACKER 1 "" "" "Libpulp Tools"
.SH NAME
ulp_packer \- Create live patch metadata
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ulp_packer
[OPTION]...
.I file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ulp_packer
creates a live patch metadata file based on the live patch description
.I file
that it takes as argument.
After parsing the description file,
.B ulp_packer
validates that the target library and live patch objects referred to exist,
then produces the metadata file required by live patching tools, such as
.BR ulp_trigger (1)
and
.BR ulp_check (1).
.PP
The syntax of the description file is described in
.IR libpulp (7).
.PP
By default, the output is written to stdout, but it can be optionally
redirected to a specified file. See OPTIONS below.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -o, --output=FILENAME
Instead of printing the results to the standard output, write them to FILENAME.
.TP
.B -p, --livepatch=FILENAME
Instead of getting the path to the live patch object from the description file,
use FILENAME.
.TP
.B -t, --target=FILENAME
Instead of getting the path to the target library from the description file,
use FILENAME.
.TP
.B -q, --quiet
Do not produce any output.
.TP
.B -v, --verbose
Produce verbose output.
.TP
.B -?, --help
Display a lengthy usage message.
.TP
.B -usage
Display a brief usage message.
.TP
.B -V --version
Print program version and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B ulp_packer
exits 0 on success and 1 on error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR libpulp (7),
.BR ulp_packer (1),
.BR ulp_reverse (1),
.BR ulp_dump (1),
.BR ulp_post (1),
.BR ulp_trigger (1),
.BR ulp_check (1).
